From: david@stat.com (David Dodell)
Subject: HICN610 Medical Newsletter, Part 2/4
Reply-To: david@stat.com (David Dodell)
Distribution: world
Organization: Stat Gateway Service, WB7TPY
Lines: 708


------------- cut here -----------------









HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page 13
Volume  6, Number 10                                           April 20, 1993

                       Gonorrhea -- Colorado, 1985-1992
                       ================================
                   SOURCE: MMWR 42(14)   DATE: Apr 16, 1993

     The number of reported cases of gonorrhea in Colorado increased 19.9% 
from 1991 to 1992 after declining steadily during the 1980s. In comparison, in 
the United States, reported cases of gonorrhea in 1992 continued an overall 
decreasing trend (1). This report summarizes an analysis of the increase in 
gonorrhea in Colorado in 1992 and characterizes trends in the occurrence of 
this disease from 1985 through 1992. 
     In 1992, 4679 cases of gonorrhea were reported to the Colorado Department 
of Health (CDH) compared with 3901 cases reported in 1991. During 1992, 
reported cases increased 22.7% and 17.5% among females and males, respectively 
(Table 1). Similar increases occurred among blacks, whites, and Hispanics 
(15.6%, 15.1%, and 15.9%, respectively); however, the number of reported cases 
with race not specified increased 88% from 1991 to 1992 and constituted 9.7% 
of all reported cases in 1992. Although the largest proportional increases by 
age groups occurred among persons aged 35-44 years (80.4%) and greater than or 
equal to 45 years (87.7%), these age groups accounted for only 11.0% of all 
reported cases in 1992. Persons in the 15-19-year age group accounted for the 
largest number of reported cases of gonorrhea during 1992 and the highest age 
group-specific rate (639 per 100,000). 
     Reported cases of gonorrhea increased 32.9% in the five-county Denver 
metropolitan area (1990 population: 1,629,466) but decreased elsewhere in the 
state (Table 1). Half the cases of gonorrhea in the Denver metropolitan area 
occurred in 8.4% (34) of the census tracts; these represent neighborhoods 
considered by sexually transmitted diseases (STDs)/acquired immunodeficiency 
syndrome (AIDS) field staff to be the focus of gang and drug activity. 
     When compared with 1991, the number of gonorrhea cases diagnosed among 
men in the Denver Metro Health Clinic (DMHC, the primary public STD clinic in 
the Denver metropolitan area) increased 33% in 1992, and the number of visits 
by males to the clinic increased 2.4%. Concurrently, the number of cases 
diagnosed among women increased by 1%. Among self-identified heterosexual men, 
the number of gonorrhea cases diagnosed at DMHC increased 33% and comprised 
94% of all cases diagnosed in males, while the number of cases diagnosed among 
self-identified homosexual men remained low (71 and 74 in 1991 and 1992, 
respectively). 
     Four selected laboratories in the metropolitan Denver area (i.e., HMO, 
university hospital, nonprofit family planning, and commercial) were contacted 
to determine whether gonorrhea culture-positivity rates increased. Gonorrhea 
culture-positivity rates in three of four laboratories contacted increased 
23%-33% from 1991 to 1992, while the rate was virtually unchanged in the 
fourth (i.e., nonprofit family planning). 
     From 1985 through 1991, reported cases of gonorrhea among whites and 
Hispanics in Colorado decreased; in comparison, reported cases among blacks 

HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page 14
Volume  6, Number 10                                           April 20, 1993

increased since 1988 (Figure 1). During 1988-1992, the population in Colorado 
increased 9.9% for blacks, 9.8% for Hispanics, and 4.5% for whites. In 1992, 
the gonorrhea rate for blacks (1935 per 100,000 persons) was 57 times that for 
whites (34 per 100,000) and 12 times that for Hispanics (156 per 100,000) 
(Table 1). Among black females, reported cases of gonorrhea increased from 
1988 through 1992 in the 15-19-year age group; among black males, cases 
increased from 1989 through 1992 in both the 15-19-and 20-24-year age groups. 

Reported by: KA Gershman, MD, JM Finn, NE Spencer, MSPH, STD/AIDS Program; RE 
Hoffman, MD, State Epidemiologist, Colorado Dept of Health. JM Douglas, MD, 
Denver Dept of Health and Hospitals. Surveillance and Information Systems Br, 
Div of Sexually Transmitted Diseases and HIV Prevention, National Center for 
Prevention Svcs, CDC. 

Editorial Note: The increase in reported gonorrhea cases in Colorado in 1992 
may represent an overall increase in the occurrence of this disease or more 
complete reporting stimulated by visitations to laboratories by CDH 
surveillance staff during 1991-1992. The increases in confirmed gonorrhea 
cases at DMHC and in culture-positivity rates in three of four laboratories 
suggest a real increase in gonorrhea rather than a reporting artifact. 
However, the stable culture-positivity rate in the nonprofit family planning 
laboratory (which serves a network of clinics statewide) indicates that the 
gonorrhea increase did not uniformly affect all segments of the population. 
     One possible explanation for the increased occurrence of gonorrhea in 
Colorado may be gang- and drug-related sexual behavior, as implicated in a 
recent outbreak of drug-resistant gonorrhea and other STDs in Colorado Springs 
(2). Although the high morbidity census tracts in the Denver metropolitan area 
coincide with areas of gang and drug activity, this hypothesis requires 
further assessment. To examine the possible role of drug use -- implicated 
previously as a factor contributing to the national increase in syphilis (3-6) 
-- the CDH STD/AIDS program is collecting information from all persons in whom 
gonorrhea is diagnosed regarding drug use, exchange of sex for money or drugs, 
and gang affiliation. 
     The gonorrhea rate for blacks in Colorado substantially exceeds the 
national health objective for the year 2000 (1300 per 100,000) (objective 
19.1a) (7). Race is likely a risk marker rather than a risk factor for 
gonorrhea and other STDs. Risk markers may be useful for identifying groups at 
greatest risk for STDs and for targeting prevention efforts. Moreover, race-
specific variation in STD rates may reflect differences in factors such as 
socioeconomic status, access to medical care, and high-risk behaviors. 
     In response to the increased occurrence of gonorrhea in Colorado, 
interventions initiated by the CDH STD/AIDS program include 1) targeting 
partner notification in the Denver metropolitan area to persons in groups at 
increased risk (e.g., 15-19-year-old black females and 20-24-year-old black 
males); 2) implementing a media campaign (e.g., public service radio 

HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page 15
Volume  6, Number 10                                           April 20, 1993

announcements, signs on city buses, newspaper advertisements, and posters in 
schools and clinics) to promote awareness of STD risk and prevention targeted 
primarily at high-risk groups, and 3) developing teams of peer educators to 
perform educational outreach in high-risk neighborhoods. The educational 
interventions are being developed and implemented with the assistance of 
members of the target groups and with input from a forum of community leaders 
and health-care providers. 

References

1. CDC. Table II. Cases of selected notifiable diseases, United States, weeks 
ending December 26, 1992, and December 28, 1991 (52nd week). MMWR 1993;41:975. 

2. CDC. Gang-related outbreak of penicillinase-producing Neisseria gonorrhoeae 
and other sexually transmitted diseases -- Colorado Springs, Colorado, 1989-
1991. MMWR 1993;42:25-8. 

3. CDC. Relationship of syphilis to drug use and prostitution -- Connecticut 
and Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. MMWR 1988;37:755-8, 764. 

4. Rolfs RT, Goldberg M, Sharrar RG. Risk factors for syphilis: cocaine use 
and prostitution. Am J Public Health 1990;80:853-7. 

5. Andrus JK, Fleming DW, Harger DR, et al. Partner notification: can it 
control epidemic syphilis? Ann Intern Med 1990;112:539-43. 

6. Gershman KA, Rolfs RT. Diverging gonorrhea and syphilis trends in the 
1980s: are they real? Am J Public Health 1991;81:1263-7. 

7. Public Health Service. Healthy people 2000: national health promotion and 
disease prevention objectives--full report, with commentary. Washington, DC: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, 1991; DHHS 
publication no. (PHS)91-50212. 












HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page 16
Volume  6, Number 10                                           April 20, 1993

                Effectiveness in Disease and Injury Prevention
            Impact of Adult Safety-Belt Use on Restraint Use Among
            Children less than 11 Years of Age -- Selected States,
                                 1988 and 1989
            ======================================================
                   SOURCE: MMWR 42(14)   DATE: Apr 16, 1993

     Motor-vehicle crashes are the leading cause of death among children and 
young adults in the United States and account for more than 1 million years of 
potential life lost before age 65 annually (1). Child safety seats and safety 
belts can substantially reduce this loss (2). From 1977 through 1985, all 50 
states passed legislation requiring the use of child safety seats or safety 
belts for children. Although these laws reduce injuries to young children by 
an estimated 8%-59% (3,4), motor-vehicle crash-related injuries remain a major 
cause of disability and death among U.S. children (1), while the use of 
occupant restraints among children decreases inversely with age (84% usage for 
those aged 0-4 years; 57%, aged 5-11 years; and 29%, aged 12-18 years) (5). In 
addition, parents who do not use safety belts themselves are less likely to 
use restraints for their children (6). To characterize the association between 
adult safety-belt use and adult-reported consistent use of occupant restraints 
for the youngest child aged less than 11 years within a household, CDC 
analyzed data obtained from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System 
(BRFSS) during 1988 and 1989. This report summarizes the findings from this 
study. 
     Data were available for 20,905 respondents aged greater than or equal to 
18 years in 11 states * that participated in BRFSS -- a population-based, 
random-digit-dialed telephone survey -- and administered a standard Injury 
Control and Child Safety Module developed by CDC. Of these respondents, 5499 
(26%) had a child aged less than 11 years in their household. Each respondent 
was asked to specify the child's age and the frequency of restraint use for 
that child. The two categories of child restraint and adult safety-belt use in 
this analysis were 1) consistent use (i.e., always buckle up) and 2) less than 
consistent use (i.e., almost always, sometimes, rarely, or never buckle up). 
Data were weighted to provide estimates representative of each state. Software 
for Survey Data Analysis (SUDAAN) (7) was used to calculate point estimates 
and confidence intervals. Statistically significant differences were defined 
by p values of less than 0.05. 
     Each of the 11 states had some type of child restraint law. Of these, six 
(Arizona, Kentucky, Maine, Nebraska, Rhode Island, and West Virginia) had no 
law requiring adults to use safety belts; four (Idaho, Maryland, Pennsylvania, 
and Washington) had a secondary enforcement mandatory safety-belt law (i.e., a 
vehicle had to be stopped for a traffic violation before a citation for nonuse 
of safety belts could be issued); and one state (New York) had a primary 
enforcement mandatory safety-belt law (i.e., vehicles could be stopped for a 
safety-belt law violation alone). In nine states, child-passenger protection 

HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page 17
Volume  6, Number 10                                           April 20, 1993

laws included all children aged less than 5 years, but the other two states 
used both age and size of the child as criteria for mandatory restraint use. 
The analysis in this report subgrouped states into 1) those having a law 
requiring adult safety-belt use (law states), and 2) those without such a law 
(no-law states). 
     Overall, 21% of children aged less than 11 years reportedly were not 
consistently restrained during automobile travel. Both child restraint use and 
adult restraint use were significantly higher (p less than 0.05, chi-square 
test) in law states than in no-law states (81.1% versus 74.3% and 58.7% versus 
43.2%, respectively). 
     High rates of restraint use for children aged less than or equal to 1 
year were reported by both adults indicating consistent and less than 
consistent safety-belt use (Figure 1). Adults with consistent use reported 
high rates of child-occupant restraint use regardless of the child's age 
(range: 95.5% for 1-year-olds to 84.7% for 10-year-olds). In comparison, for 
adults reporting less than consistent safety-belt use, the rate of child-
occupant restraint use declined sharply by the age of the child (range: 93.1% 
for 1-year-olds to 28.8% for 10-year-olds). When comparing children of 
consistent adult safety-belt users with children of less than consistent adult 
safety-belt users, 95% confidence intervals overlap for the two youngest age 
groups (i.e., aged less than 1 and 1 year). 
     Reported child-occupant restraint use in law states generally exceeded 
that in no-law states, regardless of age of child (Table 1). In addition, 
higher adult educational attainment was significantly associated with 
increased restraint use for children, a factor that has also been associated 
with increased adult safety-belt use (8). 

Reported by: National Center for Injury Prevention and Control; National 
Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, CDC. 

Editorial Note: The findings in this report are consistent with others 
indicating that adults who do not use safety belts themselves are less likely 
to employ occupant restraints for their children (6,9). Because these 
nonbelted adults are at increased risk of crashing and more likely to exhibit 
other risk-taking behaviors, children traveling with them may be at greater 
risk for motor-vehicle injury (10). 
     Educational attainment of adult respondents was inversely associated with 
child restraint use in this report. Accordingly, occupant-protection programs 
should be promoted among parents with low educational attainment. Because low 
educational attainment is often associated with low socioeconomic status, such 
programs should be offered to adults through health-care facilities that serve 
low-income communities or through federal programs (i.e., Head Start) that are 
directed at parents with young children. 
     Injury-prevention programs emphasize restraining young children. In 
addition, however, efforts must be intensified to protect child occupants as 

HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page 18
Volume  6, Number 10                                           April 20, 1993

they become older. Parents, especially those with low educational attainment, 
those who do not consistently wear safety belts, and those from states that do 
not have mandatory safety-belt use laws, should be encouraged to wear safety 
belts and to protect their children by using approved child safety seats and 
safety belts. Finally, the increased use of restraints among children may 
increase their likelihood of using safety belts when they become teenagers -- 
the age group characterized by the lowest rate of safety-belt use and the 
highest rate of fatal crashes (5). 

References

1. CDC. Childhood injuries in the United States. Am J Dis Child 1990;144:627-
46. 

2. Partyka SC. Papers on child restraints: effectiveness and use. Washington, 
DC: US Department of Transportation, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 1988; report no. DOT-HS-807-286. 

3. Guerin D, MacKinnon D. An assessment of the California child passenger 
restraint requirement. Am J Public Health 1985;75:142-4. 

4. Hall W, Orr B, Suttles D, et al. Progress report on increasing child 
restraint usage through local education and distribution programs. Chapel 
Hill, North Carolina: University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Highway 
Safety Research Center, 1983. 

5. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Occupant protection trends 
in 19 cities. Washington, DC: US Department of Transportation, National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 1991. 

6. Wagenaar AC, Molnar LJ, Margolis LH. Characteristics of child safety seat 
users. Accid Anal Prev 1988;20:311-22. 

7. Shah BV, Barnwell BG, Hunt PN, LaVange LM. Software for Survey Data 
Analysis (SUDAAN) version 5.50 Software documentation. Research Triangle 
Park, North Carolina: Research Triangle Institute, 1991. 

8. Lund AK. Voluntary seat belt use among U.S. drivers: geographic, 
socioeconomic and demographic variation. Accid Anal Prev 1986;18:43-50. 

9. Margolis LH, Wagenaar AC, Molnar LJ. Use and misuse of automobile child 
restraint devices. Am J Dis Child 1992;146:361-6. 

10. Hunter WW, Stutts JC, Stewart JR, Rodgman EA. Characteristics of seatbelt 
users and non-users in a state with a mandatory use law. Health Education 

HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page 19
Volume  6, Number 10                                           April 20, 1993

Research 1990;5:161-73. 

* Arizona, Idaho, Kentucky, Maine, Maryland, Nebraska, New York, Pennsylvania, 
Rhode Island, Washington, and West Virginia. 









































