HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page  9
Volume  6, Number 10                                           April 20, 1993

            Use of Smokeless Tobacco Among Adults -- United States,
                                     1991
            =======================================================
                   SOURCE: MMWR 42(14)   DATE: Apr 16, 1993

     Consumption of moist snuff and other smokeless tobacco products in the 
United States almost tripled from 1972 through 1991 (1). Long-term use of 
smokeless tobacco is associated with nicotine addiction and increased risk of 
oral cancer (2) -- the incidence of which could increase if young persons who 
currently use smokeless tobacco continue to use these products frequently (1). 
To monitor trends in the prevalence of use of smokeless tobacco products, 
CDC's 1991 National Health Interview Survey-Health Promotion and Disease 
Prevention supplement (NHIS-HPDP) collected information on snuff and chewing 
tobacco use and smoking from a representative sample of the U.S. civilian, 
noninstitutionalized population aged greater than or equal to 18 years. This 
report summarizes findings from this survey. 
     The 1991 NHIS-HPDP supplement asked "Have you used snuff at least 20 
times in your entire life?" and "Do you use snuff now?" Similar questions were 
asked about chewing tobacco use and cigarette smoking. Current users of 
smokeless tobacco were defined as those who reported snuff or chewing tobacco 
use at least 20 times and who reported using snuff or chewing tobacco at the 
time of the interview; former users were defined as those who reported having 
used snuff or chewing tobacco at least 20 times and not using either at the 
time of the interview. Ever users of smokeless tobacco included current and 
former users. Current smokers were defined as those who reported smoking at 
least 100 cigarettes and who were currently smoking and former smokers as 
those who reported having smoked at least 100 cigarettes and who were not 
smoking now. Ever smokers included current and former smokers. Data on 
smokeless tobacco use were available for 43,732 persons aged greater than or 
equal to 18 years and were adjusted for nonresponse and weighted to provide 
national estimates. Confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated by using 
standard errors generated by the Software for Survey Data Analysis (SUDAAN) 
(3). 
     In 1991, an estimated 5.3 million (2.9%) U.S. adults were current users 
of smokeless tobacco, including 4.8 million (5.6%) men and 533,000 (0.6%) 
women. For all categories of comparison, the prevalence of smokeless tobacco 
use was substantially higher among men. For men, the prevalence of use was 
highest among those aged 18-24 years (Table 1); for women, the prevalence was 
highest among those aged greater than or equal to 75 years. The prevalence of 
smokeless tobacco use among men was highest among American Indians/Alaskan 
Natives and whites; the prevalence among women was highest among American 
Indians/Alaskan Natives and blacks. Among both men and women, prevalence of 
smokeless tobacco use declined with increasing education. Prevalence was 
substantially higher among residents of the southern United States and in 
rural areas. Although the prevalence of smokeless tobacco use was higher among 

HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page 10
Volume  6, Number 10                                           April 20, 1993

men and women below the poverty level, * this difference was significant only 
for women (p less than 0.05) (Table 1). 
     Among men, the prevalence of current use of snuff was highest among those 
aged 18-44 years but varied considerably by age; the prevalence of use of 
chewing tobacco was more evenly distributed by age group (Table 2). Although 
women rarely used smokeless tobacco, the prevalence of snuff use was highest 
among those aged greater than or equal to 75 years. 
     An estimated 7.9 million (4.4% 95% CI=4.1-4.6) adults reported being 
former smokeless tobacco users. Among ever users, the proportion who were 
former smokeless tobacco users was 59.9% (95% CI=57.7-62.1). Among persons 
aged 18-24 years, the proportion of former users was lower among snuff users 
(56.2% 95% CI=49.4-63.0) than among chewing tobacco users (70.4% 95% 
CI=64.2-76.6). Among persons aged 45-64 years, the proportion of former users 
was similar for snuff (68.9% 95% CI=63.1-74.7) and chewing tobacco (73.5% 
95% CI=68.9-78.1). 
     Among current users of smokeless tobacco, 22.9% (95% CI=19.9-26.0) 
currently smoked, 33.3% (95% CI=30.0-36.5) formerly smoked, and 43.8% (95% 
CI=39.9-47.7) never smoked. In comparison, among current smokers, 2.6% (95% 
CI=2.3-3.0) were current users of smokeless tobacco. 
     Daily use of smokeless tobacco was more common among snuff users (67.3% 
95% CI=63.2-71.4) than among chewing tobacco users (45.1% 95% CI=40.6-
49.6). 

Reported by: Office on Smoking and Health, National Center for Chronic Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion; Div of Health Interview Statistics, National 
Center for Health Statistics, CDC. 

Editorial Note: The findings in this report indicate that the use of smokeless 
tobacco was highest among young males. Adolescent and young adult males, in 
particular, are the target of marketing strategies by tobacco companies that 
link smokeless tobacco with athletic performance and virility. Use of oral 
snuff has risen markedly among professional baseball players, encouraging this 
behavior among adolescent and young adult males and increasing their risk for 
nicotine addiction, oral cancer, and other mouth disorders (4). 
     Differences in the prevalence of smokeless tobacco use among 
racial/ethnic groups may be influenced by differences in educational levels 
and socioeconomic status as well as social and cultural phenomena that require 
further explanation. For example, targeted marketing practices may play a role 
in maintaining or increasing prevalence among some groups, and affecting the 
differential initiation of smokeless tobacco use by young persons (5,6). 
     In this report, one concern is that nearly one fourth of current 
smokeless tobacco users also smoke cigarettes. In the 1991 NHIS-HPDP, the 
prevalence of cigarette smoking was higher among former smokeless tobacco 
users than among current and never smokeless tobacco users. In a previous 
study among college students, 18% of current smokeless tobacco users smoked 

HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page 11
Volume  6, Number 10                                           April 20, 1993

occasionally (7). In addition, approximately 7% of adults who formerly smoked 
reported substituting other tobacco products for cigarettes in an effort to 
stop smoking (8). Health-care providers should recognize the potential health 
implications of concurrent smokeless tobacco and cigarette use. 
     The national health objectives for the year 2000 have established special 
population target groups for the reduction of the prevalence of smokeless 
tobacco use, including males aged 12-24 years (to no more than 4% by the year 
2000 objective 3.9) and American Indian/Alaskan Native youth (to no more 
than 10% by the year 2000 objective 3.9a) (9). Strategies to lower the 
prevalence of smokeless tobacco use include continued monitoring of smokeless 
tobacco use, integrating smoking and smokeless tobacco-control efforts, 
enforcing laws that restrict minors' access to tobacco, making excise taxes 
commensurate with those on cigarettes, encouraging health-care providers to 
routinely provide cessation advice and follow-up, providing school-based 
prevention and cessation interventions, and adopting policies that prohibit 
tobacco use on school property and at school-sponsored events (5). 

References

1. Office of Evaluations and Inspections. Spit tobacco and youth. Washington, 
DC: US Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Inspector 
General, 1992; DHHS publication no. (OEI-06)92-00500. 

2. National Institutes of Health. The health consequences of using smokeless 
tobacco: a report of the Advisory Committee to the Surgeon General. Bethesda, 
Maryland: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, 
1986; DHHS publication no. (NIH)86-2874. 

3. Shah BV. Software for Survey Data Analysis (SUDAAN) version 5.30 Software 
documentation. Research Triangle Park, North Carolina: Research Triangle 
Institute, 1989. 

4. Connolly GN, Orleans CT, Blum A. Snuffing tobacco out of sport. Am J Public 
Health 1992;82:351-3. 

5. National Cancer Institute. Smokeless tobacco or health: an international 
perspective. Bethesda, Maryland: US Department of Health and Human Services, 
Public Health Service, National Institutes of Health, 1992; DHHS publication 
no. (NIH)92-3461. 

6. Foreyt JP, Jackson AS, Squires WG, Hartung GH, Murray TD, Gotto AM. 
Psychological profile of college students who use smokeless tobacco. Addict 
Behav 1993;18:107-16. 

7. Glover ED, Laflin M, Edwards SW. Age of initiation and switching patterns 

HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page 12
Volume  6, Number 10                                           April 20, 1993

between smokeless tobacco and cigarettes among college students in the United 
States. Am J Public Health 1989;79:207-8. 

8. CDC. Tobacco use in 1986: methods and tabulations from Adult Use of Tobacco 
Survey. Rockville, Maryland: US Department of Health and Human Services, 
Public Health Service, CDC, 1990; DHHS publication no. (OM)90-2004. 

9. Public Health Service. Healthy people 2000: national health promotion and 
disease prevention objectives. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and 
Human Services, Public Health Service, 1991; DHHS publication no. (PHS)91-
50213.

























--------- end of part 1 ------------

---
      Internet: david@stat.com                  FAX: +1 (602) 451-1165
      Bitnet: ATW1H@ASUACAD                     FidoNet= 1:114/15
                Amateur Packet ax25: wb7tpy@wb7tpy.az.usa.na
